first draft of merging connectors content (#484)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/manage-connectors.md

::::{note}
This page is about {{kib}} connectors that integrate with services like generative AI model providers. If you’re looking for Search connectors that synchronize third-party data into {{es}}, refer to [Connector clients](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/serverless/current/elasticsearch-ingest-data-through-integrations-connector-client.html).

::::

## Required permissions [_required_permissions_2]

Access to connectors is granted based on your privileges to alerting-enabled features. For more information, go to [Security](../explore-analyze/alerts-cases/alerts/alerting-setup.md#alerting-security).

## Connector networking configuration [_connector_networking_configuration]

> ```yaml {applies_to}
> serverless: unavailable
> ```

Reviewer: the way this label looks, it feels like it's just for serverless (a result of the coloring). imo I'd do a "stack" label instead

````suggestion
```yaml {applies_to}
stack:
```
````

> Use the [action configuration settings](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/alert-action-settings-kb.html#action-settings) to customize connector networking configurations, such as proxies, certificates, or TLS settings. You can set configurations that apply to all your connectors or use `xpack.actions.customHostSettings` to set per-host configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using {{stack}}, use the [action configuration settings](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/alert-action-settings-kb.html#action-settings) to customize connector networking configurations, such as proxies, certificates, or TLS settings. You can set configurations that apply to all your connectors or use `xpack.actions.customHostSettings` to set per-host configurations.
```

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connector-delete.png
:alt: Deleting connectors individually or in bulk
:class: screenshot
:::

::::{note}
You can delete a connector even if there are still actions referencing it. When this happens the action will fail to run and errors appear in the {{kib}} logs.

::::

## Creating a new connector [creating-new-connector]

New connectors can be created with the **Create connector** button, which guides you to select the type of connector and configure its properties. For a full list of available connectors, see [Available connectors](asciidocalypse://docs/kibana/docs/reference/connectors-kibana/connectors-kibana.md).

::::{note}
Some connector types are paid commercial features, while others are free. For a comparison of the Elastic subscription levels, go to [the subscription page](https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions).
::::

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connector-select-type.png
:alt: Connector select type
:class: screenshot
:width: 75%
:::

After you create a connector, it is available for use any time you set up an action in the current space.

::::{tip}

> **Preconfigured connectors and the Terraform providers are not available in serverless projects.**
> 
> For out-of-the-box and standardized connectors, refer to [preconfigured connectors](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/pre-configured-connectors.html). 
> 
> You can also manage connectors as resources with the [Elasticstack provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest) for Terraform. For more details, refer to the [elasticstack_kibana_action_connector](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest/docs/resources/kibana_action_connector) resource.

Reviewer: the "unavailable" note placement indicates to me that this entire note is related to _alternatives_ for serverless. this prob flows better:

```suggestion
For out-of-the-box and standardized connectors, refer to [preconfigured connectors](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/pre-configured-connectors.html). 

You can also manage connectors as resources with the [Elasticstack provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest) for Terraform. For more details, refer to the [elasticstack_kibana_action_connector](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest/docs/resources/kibana_action_connector) resource.

Preconfigured connectors and the Terraform resource are not available in {{serverless-full}} projects.
```

::::

## Importing and exporting connectors [importing-and-exporting-connectors]

To import and export connectors, use the [Saved Objects Management UI](/explore-analyze/find-and-organize/saved-objects.md).

If a connector is missing sensitive information after the import, a **Fix** button appears in **{{connectors-ui}}**.

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connectors-with-missing-secrets.png
:alt: Connectors with missing secrets
:class: screenshot
:::

> ## Monitoring connectors [monitoring-connectors]

Author: @shainaraskas I took a stab at going into a bit more details here to talk about monitor in both cases with the Task manager health API and with the event log. Since you can use the event log in both

> For all deployment types except for serverless projects, you can use the [Task Manager health API](../deploy-manage/monitor/kibana-task-manager-health-monitoring.md) to help you understand the performance of all tasks in your environment. However, if connectors fail to run, they will report as successful to Task Manager. The failure stats will not accurately depict the performance of connectors.
> 
> Additionally, you can use the [console](/explore-analyze/query-filter/tools/console.md) to query the [Event log index](../explore-analyze/alerts-cases/alerts/event-log-index.md) to gather information on connector successes and failures on any type of deployment.

Reviewer: I'd swap this to put the "works for everyone" stuff first and the "only for some people" stuff second

also, you don't need to use the console to query an index ... you can query an index from anywhere

```suggestion
You can query the [Event log index](/explore-analyze/alerts-cases/alerts/event-log-index.md) to gather information on connector successes and failures.

If you're using {{stack}}, then you can also use the [Task Manager health API](/deploy-manage/monitor/kibana-task-manager-health-monitoring.md) to monitor connector performance. However, if connectors fail to run, they will report as successful to Task Manager. The failure stats will not accurately depict connector failures.
```

mapped_urls:
  - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/action-types.html
  - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/serverless/current/action-connectors.html

> applies_to:
>   stack: ga all
>   deployment:
>     hosted: ga
>     ece: ga
>     eck: ga
>     self: ga
>   serverless:
>     security: ga
>     elasticsearch: ga
>     observability: ga

Reviewer: we could go two directions with this:

deployment type focus
```suggestion
applies_to:
  deployment:
    hosted: ga
    ece: ga
    eck: ga
    self: ga
  serverless:
```

stack vs. serverless focus
```suggestion
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
```

doing both is overkill

no need to list the serverless project types unless they're relevant (they are not here)

---

# Manage connectors [connector-management]

> $$$connector-management$$$

Reviewer: no need to keep both of these if the anchor is attached to a header

```suggestion
```

Connectors serve as a central place to store connection information for both Elastic and third-party systems. They enable the linking of actions to rules, which execute as background tasks on the {{kib}} server when rule conditions are met. This allows rules to route actions to various destinations such as log files, ticketing systems, and messaging tools. Different {{kib}} apps may have their own rule types, but they typically share connectors. The **{{stack-manage-app}} > {{connectors-ui}}** provides a central location to view and manage all connectors in the current space.

::::{note}

> This page is about Kibana connectors that integrate with services like generative AI model providers. If you’re looking for Search connectors that synchronize third-party data into {{es}}, refer to [Connector clients](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/serverless/current/elasticsearch-ingest-data-through-integrations-connector-client.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page is about {{kib}} connectors that integrate with services like generative AI model providers. If you’re looking for Search connectors that synchronize third-party data into {{es}}, refer to [Connector clients](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/serverless/current/elasticsearch-ingest-data-through-integrations-connector-client.html).
```

::::

## Required permissions [_required_permissions_2]

Access to connectors is granted based on your privileges to alerting-enabled features. For more information, go to [Security](../explore-analyze/alerts-cases/alerts/alerting-setup.md#alerting-security).

## Connector networking configuration [_connector_networking_configuration]

> Use the [action configuration settings](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/alert-action-settings-kb.html#action-settings) to customize connector networking configurations, such as proxies, certificates, or TLS settings. You can set configurations that apply to all your connectors or use `xpack.actions.customHostSettings` to set per-host configurations.

Reviewer: this doesn't apply to serverless - what do serverless users do?

## Connector list [connectors-list]

In **{{stack-manage-app}} > {{connectors-ui}}**, you can find a list of the connectors in the current space. You can use the search bar to find specific connectors by name and type. The **Type** dropdown also enables you to filter to a subset of connector types.

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connector-filter-by-type.png
:alt: Filtering the connector list by types of connectors
:class: screenshot
:::

You can delete individual connectors using the trash icon. Alternatively, select multiple connectors and delete them in bulk using the **Delete** button.

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connector-delete.png
:alt: Deleting connectors individually or in bulk
:class: screenshot
:::

::::{note}
You can delete a connector even if there are still actions referencing it. When this happens the action will fail to run and errors appear in the {{kib}} logs.

::::

## Creating a new connector [creating-new-connector]

> New connectors can be created with the **Create connector** button, which guides you to select the type of connector and configure its properties. For a full list of available connectors, see [Available connectors](asciidocalypse://docs/kibana/docs/reference/connectors-kibana/connectors-kibana.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New connectors can be created with the **Create connector** button, which guides you to select the type of connector and configure its properties. For a full list of available connectors, see [Available connectors](asciidocalypse://docs/kibana/docs/reference/connectors-kibana/connectors-kibana.md).
```

::::{note}
Some connector types are paid commercial features, while others are free. For a comparison of the Elastic subscription levels, go to [the subscription page](https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions).
::::

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connector-select-type.png
:alt: Connector select type
:class: screenshot

> :::

Reviewer: this image is vv large - can we use the `width` attribute to resize? 

<img width="826" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/054fc3d3-1654-49d8-bbd1-fdbdf11173b3" />

After you create a connector, it is available for use any time you set up an action in the current space.

For out-of-the-box and standardized connectors, refer to [preconfigured connectors](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/pre-configured-connectors.html).

> ::::{tip}

Reviewer: this feels like it isn't applicable to serverless either

Author: You are correct. I took a stab at calling out both preconfigured connectors and the Terraform provider in a singular note. Not sure if this is ok with our current guidelines.

You can also manage connectors as resources with the [Elasticstack provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest) for Terraform. For more details, refer to the [elasticstack_kibana_action_connector](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest/docs/resources/kibana_action_connector) resource.
::::

## Importing and exporting connectors [importing-and-exporting-connectors]

To import and export connectors, use the [Saved Objects Management UI](/explore-analyze/find-and-organize/saved-objects.md).

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connectors-import-banner.png
:alt: Connectors import banner
:class: screenshot

> :::

Reviewer: this image is even more large

consider the value of the images: do we need them?

If a connector is missing sensitive information after the import, a **Fix** button appears in **{{connectors-ui}}**.

:::{image} ../images/kibana-connectors-with-missing-secrets.png
:alt: Connectors with missing secrets
:class: screenshot
:::

## Monitoring connectors [monitoring-connectors]

> The [Task Manager health API](../deploy-manage/monitor/kibana-task-manager-health-monitoring.md) helps you understand the performance of all tasks in your environment. However, if connectors fail to run, they will report as successful to Task Manager. The failure stats will not accurately depict the performance of connectors.

Reviewer: this API isn't available in serverless.

> For more information on connector successes and failures, refer to the [Event log index](../explore-analyze/alerts-cases/alerts/event-log-index.md).

Reviewer: not sure if this applies
